Part II, Lesson 4 (#37)
gbdev/gb-asm-tutorial: src/part2/collision.md

# Collision

Being able to move around is great, but there's still one object we need for this game: a ball!
Just like with the paddle, the first step is to create a tile for the ball and load it into VRAM.

> 

Reviewer: Agree

> Just like with the paddle, the first step is to create a graphic for the ball and load it into VRAM.

Author: "create a tile" could work

Add this to the bottom of your file along with the other graphics:
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:ball-sprite}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:ball-sprite}}
```

Now copy it to VRAM in your initialization code.
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:copy-ball}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:copy-ball}}
```

In addition, we need to initialize an entry in OAM, right after where we initialize the paddle.
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:oam}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:oam}}
```

As the ball bounces around the screen its momentum will change, sending it in different directions.

> Let's create two new variables to track the ball's momentum in the two axis: `wBallMomentumX` and `wBallMomentumY`.

Author: Honestly I prefer the original wording ("in each axis"); "axes" is quite uncommon.

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:ram}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:ram}}
```

> We'll need to initialize these, so let's so do right after we write the ball to OAM.

Reviewer: I think this lesson is "loaded" enough, let's do that in one of the following lessons.

Carry is represented by a `c`, like how zero is a `z`, but don't get it confused with the `c` register!

Just like `z`, you can use it to conditionally jump.
However, while `z` is used to check if two numbers are equal, `c` can be used to check if numbers are greater than or less than each other.
For example, `cp a, b` sets `c` if `a < b`, and does not set `c` if `a >= b`.
(If you want to check `a <= b` or `a > b`, you can use `z` and `c` in tandem with two `jp` instructions)

Armed with this knowledge, let's work through the paddle bounce code:
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:paddle-bounce}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:paddle-bounce}}
```

The Y position's check is simple, since our paddle is flat.
However, the X position has two checks which widen the area the ball can bounce on.
First we add 16 to the ball's position; if the ball is more than 16 pixels to the right of the paddle, it shouldn't bounce.
Then we undo this by subtracting 16, and while we're at it, subtract another 8 pixels; if the ball is more than 8 pixels to the left of the paddle, it shouldn't bounce.

> You might be wondering why we checked 16 pixels to the right but only 8 pixels to the left.
> Remember that OAM positions represent the upper-*left* corner of a sprite, so the center of our paddle is actually 4 pixels to the right of the position in OAM.
> When you consider this, we're actually checking 12 pixels out on either side from the center of the paddle.
> 12 pixels might seem like a lot, but it gives some tolerance to the player in case their positioning is off.
> If you'd prefer to make this easier or more difficult, feel free to adjust the values!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::: note

You might be wondering why we checked 16 pixels to the right but only 8 pixels to the left.
Remember that OAM positions represent the upper-*left* corner of a sprite, so the center of our paddle is actually 4 pixels to the right of the position in OAM.
When you consider this, we're actually checking 12 pixels out on either side from the center of the paddle.

12 pixels might seem like a lot, but it gives some tolerance to the player in case their positioning is off.
If you'd prefer to make this easier or more difficult, feel free to adjust the values!

:::
```

By setting the X momentum to 1, and the Y momentum to -1, the ball will start out by going up and to the right.
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:init}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:init}}
```

## Prep work

Now for the fun part!
Add a bit of code at the beginning of your main loop that adds the momentum to the OAM positions.
Notice that since this is the second OAM entry, we use `+ 4` for Y and `+ 5` for X.
This can get pretty confusing, but luckily we only have two objects to keep track of.
In the future, we'll go over a much easier way to use OAM.
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:momentum}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:momentum}}
```

You might want to compile your game again to see what this does.
If you do, you should see the ball moving around, but it will just go through the walls and offscreen.

We need to add collision with the walls so that the ball can bounce around.
There's some complexity to doing this, so we're going to make use of two functions.

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.
> The basic idea is that it converts the position of the sprite to a location on the tilemap.
> This way, we can check which tile our ball is touching so that we know when to bounce!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::: tip

Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.
The basic idea is that it converts the position of the sprite to a location on the tilemap.
This way, we can check which tile our ball is touching so that we know when to bounce!

:::

```

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:get-tile}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:get-tile}}
```

The next function is called `IsWallTile`, and it's going to contain a list of tiles which the ball can bounce off of.
This should be easier to understand!
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:is-wall-tile}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:is-wall-tile}}
```

This function might look a bit strange at first.
Instead of returning its result in a *register*, like `a`, it returns it in [a *flag*](../part1/operations.md#flags): `Z`!
If at any point a tile matches, the function has found a wall and exits with `Z` set.

> If the target tile ID (in `a`) matches one of the wall tile IDs, the corresponding `cp` will leave `Z` set; if so, we return immediately (via `ret Z`), with `Z` set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the target tile ID (in `a`) matches one of the wall tile IDs, the corresponding `cp` will leave `Z` set; if so, we return immediately (via `ret z`), with `Z` set.
```

Author: I don't like this inconsistency

Reviewer 2: It would be inconsistent with the code.

{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:first-tile-collision}}
```

You'll see that when we load the sprite's positions, we subtract from them before calling `GetTileByPixel`.
You might remember from the last chapter that OAM positions are slightly offset; that is, (0, 0) in OAM is actually completely offscreen.
These `sub` instructions undo this offset.

However, there's a bit more to this: you might have noticed that we subtracted an extra pixel from the Y position.
That's because (as the label suggests), this code is checking for a tile above the ball.
We actually need to check *all four* sides of the ball so we know how to change the momentum according to which side collided, so... let's add the rest!

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:tile-collision}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:tile-collision}}
```

That was a lot, but now the ball bounces around your screen!
There's just one last thing to do before this chapter is over, and thats ball-to-paddle collision.

## Paddle bounce

Unlike with the tilemap, there's no position conversions to do here, just straight comparisons.

> However, we'll need to cover a new concept: the *carry* flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, for these, we will need [the *carry* flag](../part1/operations.md#flags).
```

> Carry is represented by a `C`, like how zero is a `Z`, but don't get it confused with the `c` register!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The carry flag is notated as `C`, like how the zero flag is notated as `Z`, but don't confuse it with the `c` register!
```

> Just like `Z`, you can use it to conditionally jump.
> However, while `Z` is used to check if two numbers are equal, `C` can be used to check if numbers are greater than or less than each other.
> For example, `cp a, b` sets `C` if `a < b`, and does not set `C` if `a >= b`.
> (If you want to check `a <= b` or `a > b`, you can use `Z` and `C` in tandem with two `jp` instructions)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::: tip A refresher on comparisons

Just like `Z`, you can use the carry flag to jump conditionally.
However, while `Z` is used to check if two numbers are equal, `C` can be used to check if a number is greater than or smaller than another one.
For example, `cp a, b` sets `C` if `a < b`, and clears it if `a >= b`.
(If you want to check `a <= b` or `a > b`, you can use `Z` and `C` in tandem with two `jp` instructions.)

:::
```

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:ram}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:ram}}
```

We will need to initialize these before entering the game loop, so let's so do right after we write the ball to OAM.
By setting the X momentum to 1, and the Y momentum to -1, the ball will start out by going up and to the right.
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:init}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:init}}
```

## Prep work

Now for the fun part!
Add a bit of code at the beginning of your main loop that adds the momentum to the OAM positions.
Notice that since this is the second OAM entry, we use `+ 4` for Y and `+ 5` for X.
This can get pretty confusing, but luckily we only have two objects to keep track of.
In the future, we'll go over a much easier way to use OAM.
```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:momentum}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:momentum}}
```

You might want to compile your game again to see what this does.
If you do, you should see the ball moving around, but it will just go through the walls and offscreen.

> We need to add collision with the walls so that the ball can bounce around.

Author: I feel like "add collision with the walls" makes sense (the ball will collide with the walls) whereas "add collision detection with the walls" is more confusing (the walls will be used to detect collision?)

> We need to add collision with the walls so that the ball can bounce around.

Reviewer: > I agree with Evie there. Plus, collision is not just detection, it is also reaction.
I'm not following you. For you _adding collision_ is okay , even if it literally doesn't mean anything in plain english but "adding collision detection" is wrong because we should include reaction too? Try to google "collision detection gamedev". In almost every single result to add the "detection" of something also implies (or it's the natural prerequisite) for reacting to it.

> "add collision detection and response"
I don't see how this is complex, especially because this is what we are doing and presenting anyway, so how can the fact that "it's too complex" be a problem at all?

> We need to add collision with the walls so that the ball can bounce around.

Author: It's not really about the use of "detection" so much as the "with the walls" part. If we want to make it say "collision detection", it would have to look like this:
> We need to add collision detection so that the ball can bounce around.
which works.

> There's some complexity to doing this, so we're going to make use of two functions.

Reviewer 2: How about "since the code is somewhat lenghty, we will split some of it out into two functions"?

> There's some complexity to doing this, so we're going to make use of two functions.

Author: I’ve already changed this to mention that the code needs to be *repeated* a few times.

> There's some complexity to doing this, so we're going to make use of two functions.

Reviewer 2: I blame GitHub Mobile's UI not showing the changes you made since. :( Sorry!

::: tip

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Author: There is *so much* to explain here that it would take an entire chapter to do so. I don't see any way to explain this without wasting a lot of the reader's time.

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Reviewer 2: All things considered, I think it would make sense to discuss this function in a chapter of its own, since there is so much to discuss.

Considering the way Part II is written, I think we should explain it after introducing it, so that all of the dry concepts and explanations will at least be in a context and goal already known to the reader.

Thus, I think we should dedicate the lesson following this one to that function. Does that seem reasonable?

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Reviewer: If there is so much to discuss, and if it requires _an entire_ chapter, why exactly are we pushing this to the reader without discussing it beforehand? I don't see any advantage in doing so, except adding complexity in how are the concept presented. What I can propose is to actually write "this chapter that will explain this block" and then we merge/add it here. Eventually maybe this chapter could be split in 2 if it's too long, but I believe that the we definitely exaggerated in the "goal" for this chapter by pushing too much "unexplained" or "ignore this , will be explained" later stuff

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Author: It's simply because all the math and instructions behind this would completely throw off the pacing of the tutorial. Our primary concern at the moment is teaching the logic of assembly and making a game.

I don't think anyone wants to start off "Hello, world!" by explaining all the intricacies of file descriptors and pipes, for example. I would consider this function to be "`#include <stdio.h>`". It would be nice to explain more, but now is not the time.

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Reviewer 2: Showing results and explaining them later has been the entire guiding principle behind Part I, since the gb-asm-tutorial-old showed that the "explain everything first, show results at the end" strategy was ineffective.

I think it also helps making the tutorial feeling more cohesive; think of it as a plot thread/cliffhanger?

Maybe we should reword this info box, however. How about:

> This function uses a lot of concepts we haven't talked about yet.
> We will examine and explain it in the next section; for now, let's assume it does what we want it to.

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Author: "next section" being part 3?

> Please do not get stuck on the details of this next function, as it uses some techniques and instructions we haven't discussed yet.

Reviewer 2: I meant "next lesson", don't mind me.

You might remember from the last chapter that OAM positions are slightly offset; that is, (0, 0) in OAM is actually completely offscreen.
These `sub` instructions undo this offset.

However, there's a bit more to this: you might have noticed that we subtracted an extra pixel from the Y position.
That's because (as the label suggests), this code is checking for a tile above the ball.
We actually need to check *all four* sides of the ball so we know how to change the momentum according to which side collided, so... let's add the rest!

```rgbasm,linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:tile-collision}}
{{#include ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:tile-collision}}
```

That was a lot, but now the ball bounces around your screen!
There's just one last thing to do before this chapter is over, and thats ball-to-paddle collision.

## Paddle bounce

Unlike with the tilemap, there's no position conversions to do here, just straight comparisons.
However, for these, we will need [the *carry* flag](../part1/operations.md#flags).
The carry flag is notated as `C`, like how the zero flag is notated as `Z`, but don't confuse it with the `c` register!

> ::: tip A refresher on comparisons

Reviewer: minor: I really like those boxes!

::: tip Paddle width

You might be wondering why we checked 16 pixels to the right but only 8 pixels to the left.
Remember that OAM positions represent the upper-*left* corner of a sprite, so the center of our paddle is actually 4 pixels to the right of the position in OAM.
When you consider this, we're actually checking 12 pixels out on either side from the center of the paddle.

12 pixels might seem like a lot, but it gives some tolerance to the player in case their positioning is off.
If you'd prefer to make this easier or more difficult, feel free to adjust the values!

:::

## BONUS: tweaking the bounce height

You might notice that the ball seems to "sink" into the paddle a bit before bouncing. This is because the ball bounces when its top row of pixels aligns with the paddle's top row (see the image above). If you want, try to adjust this so that the ball bounces when its bottom row of pixels touches the paddle's top.

Hint: you can do this with just a single instruction!

<details><summary>Answer:</summary>

```diff linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:paddle-bounce}}
	ld a, [_OAMRAM]
	ld b, a
	ld a, [_OAMRAM + 4]
+	sub a, 6
	cp a, b
```

> Alternatively, you can add `add a, 6` just after `ld a, [_OAMRAM]` instead.

Reviewer: Doesn't Alternatively already says what "instead" does? We should pick one only.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it does, as an alternative could be to only add code. So I think the redundancy here helps clarify the intent.

If you'd prefer to make this easier or more difficult, feel free to adjust the values!

:::

## BONUS: tweaking the bounce height

You might notice that the ball seems to "sink" into the paddle a bit before bouncing. This is because the ball bounces when its top row of pixels aligns with the paddle's top row (see the image above). If you want, try to adjust this so that the ball bounces when its bottom row of pixels touches the paddle's top.

Hint: you can do this with just a single instruction!

<details><summary>Answer:</summary>

```diff linenos,start={{#line_no_of "" ../../unbricked/collision/main.asm:paddle-bounce}}
	ld a, [_OAMRAM]
	ld b, a
	ld a, [_OAMRAM + 4]
+	sub a, 6
	cp a, b
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Alternatively, you can add `add a, 6` just after `ld a, [_OAMRAM]` instead.

In both cases, try playing with that `6` value, see what feels right!

```
